Hi there and welcome back.
In this video, we're looking at CSV files.
Sometimes, we need to store more complex data in a file,
rather than just single strings as we've been seeing.
And a CSV file is just the way to do that.
When you need to store slightly more complex data,
but maybe not necessarily too complex.
Instead of storing one thing per line,
now we can store, well,
we're still storing one thing per line really,
but now the thing has commas in there
and then what we're gonna do
is we're going to split the line by the comma,
and that's gonna give us multiple pieces of data.
So here for example, we've got a name,
an age, a university,
and a degree that somebody's doing.
This gives us information about a single person.
The first row tells us the headings of the data,
so that when we look at the file,
we can tell what it means.
The first column is the name,
second one is the age,
third one is the university,
last one is the degree.
So what we're gonna do is we're going to write a programme
that is going to read these three lines,
not the first one,
and it's going to print out
the information about this person
in a slightly nicer way.
Just to experiment with reading CSV files.
Let's go over to csv_read.py,
a file that I've just created.
And we are going to begin.
The first thing to do is, of course,
read the lines in the file.
I'm sure you can do that.
Hopefully you got that, what to do,
is of course, open the csv_data.txt in read mode
and then we can look at the lines
and that's gonna be file.readlines
and then we can close the file.
Now we've got all the lines,
that's from line number one to three and four,
including the new line characters at the end
and all the characters in the line.
Now, what we want to do is ignore the first line.
What to do is say lines equals lines one colon.
If you remember from when we looked at lists,
this is called slicing a list and it lets us,
essentially get only a part of the list.
We're going to change this lines variable
to now be what the lines variable was,
but only from index one on words.
We're going to get index one on words.
That's one, two and three here.
We're going to ignore the first line.
Of course we also want to remove
any white space, like new line characters.
We can put this inside a list comprehension
that says, line.strip for line in that, in the slice.
The reason why I do this here
instead of up here is so that we are only stripping
the lines that we want to strip
and not the first lines
cause we don't actually care about it.
Now that we've got these lines, we can iterate over them
and we can say that the person that we are going to analyse
is the entire line, but we want to get the data in it,
which is separated by commas.
What do we do?
As we did in a last video, we're gonna split
the line by the comma.
We're gonna say person, data equals line dot split.
On the comma.
That's going to give us a list
of various elements.
The first one's gonna be rolf,
the second one's gonna be 25,
third one's gonna be mit
and the fourth one's gonna be computer science.
So, the list is gonna have four elements.
In order to make it easier for us
to work with this programme,
I'm going to create a variable per element.
Its not something you have to do,
but I like doing that.
So, name equals person data zero.
Age equals person data one,
university equals person data two,
and the degree is person data three.
Now, of course, you'll get an index error
if your file does not have the right format.
But, that's a problem in any case,
whenever you're interacting with files
or with databases or anything else,
your program's gonna be reasonably coupled
to the data that you're interacting with.
So, that's a problem that we have to deal with
if it happens.
Now that we've got the name, age, university and degree,
we can print out a line saying,
this person is 25 years old
and is studying computer science at MIT.
So, we can print.
Something like name is age studying and degree
at university.
Now, the problem when we do this...
Let's run the file.
Is that it doesn't look so fantastic.
There's no uppercase letters, no capitals anywhere.
Let's make it a bit nicer.
The way we're gonna do that
is by using some builtin methods of the string class
that allows us to add capital letters
and so forth in various places.
For the name, we're gonna use dot title
and that just turns into title case,
so the first letter of every word
is going to be uppercase.
For degree, we are going to use
capitalise because that turns
the first letter only into uppercase.
For university, we're gonna use title as well,
for that turns the first letter of every word uppercase.
Okay, let's run the file again.
And now we can see that it looks a bit nicer.
We got Rolf is 25, studying computer science at Mit.
Okay, this doesn't look so fantastic,
but I think this is a data problem.
There's no way for us to know
that the university is an acronym.
For that, I think the data should be all uppercase
if we wanted it to be like that.
I think that's a small side problem,
we don't have to worry too much about it.
Of course, instead of applying python code in here,
I've told you before how I don't really like that,
putting python code inside the string,
it looks a bit ugly.
I think that we should, instead,
put these title and capitalise functions
in the appropriate places here.
That way it just makes it a bit nicer,
a bit easier to read.
Okay?
Of course, this is allowing us to read the CSV file,
extract the data from it, and then potentially
print it out, we could multiply things,
we could calculate new datas, we could analyse it,
whatever you want to do with python code.
If you wanted to write to the file,
its exactly the same as writing any other file,
except you'd be writing a big string
with various things separated by commas.
Like you could write, rolf, 25, computer science,
or rather mit computer science.
If you write that into the file,
that's all you need.
That is gonna mimic exactly what we've got in here.
So, writing a CSV just means joining
the constituent values you want to write with a comma.
And that's pretty straight forward.
By the way, just for context,
the way you do that is a sample CSV value
is you do comma, dot join and in here,
you put a list of values you want to join,
like Rolf, 25, MIT, Computer Science.
This is how you would join a list of values into a CSV.
Down here, this is what this prints out.
I just wanted to give you this info
just in case you want to store some values
in a CSV using this syntax, string dot join
is gonna join every element of this list to each other
using this character here as the joining character.
If you want to use a colon instead,
you can do that, of course, and then your string
will just look like this.
It would look like the various constituent values
were joined by colons.
You could use any character you want
as long as its not a character
that's gonna appear inside the data.
For example, if you use the space to join it,
you'd have a problem because one of your values
has the space and then, of course,
you're gonna have multiple values.
You're gonna have five values instead of four
when push comes to shove.
Now, you see?
Now you've got a space here, space here, space here,
now a space here even though this
should be one single value.
That's why you have to use a value here
that won't appear in any of the strings.
A comma is normally a good choice,
so is a colon, so is a hash symbol.
These things normally don't appear.
When you are then reading the data,
instead of splitting by the comma,
you can just split by the hash symbol.
And that's the same thing.
It stops being a CSV file, now its a...
Instead of a comma separated value file,
now it's a hash separated value file.
It doesn't matter, same sort of thing.
Okay, that's all I wanted to say in this video.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next one.